# FLOW Lab Long Term Research Assistant Development (LTRAD) Program

The LTRAD program is being developed in order to aid the motivated undergraduate student in her/his efforts to develop skills related to performing, publishing, and presenting research.  Some research groups, like the FLOW Lab, require a base set of skills that undergrads typically don't begin learning until late in their sophomore, or even into their junior, year. The overall vision of this program is to equip freshmen and sophomore students to start developing research related skills much sooner than has been typical, and as a side benefit, get a head start on useful skills such as scientific computing that will be readily applicable in the Junior Core and Technical Elective courses.

The program has been set up to function in a manner analogous to the typical engineering course.  The end goal of the development program is for the undergraduate to succefully complete, and report on, a semester-long research project, typically undertaken as part of ME EN 497R research credit/technical elective. Thus the first step in the LTRAD program is to find a project that you want to work toward completeing. Topics in the research areas applicable to the FLOW Lab are listed in [Projects](2-projects).  Research projects may be somewhat different than the semester projects found in undergraduate engineering courses in that they are open-ended problems that don't have a "right" answer. These projects will require some planning. The path to complete them is not defined, and may not be immediately clear.

In an engineering course, one does not typically have all the skills needed to complete a semseter project right at the beginning, but rather completes assignments and smaller projects in order to gain the required knowledge/skills.  In much the same way, activities are being developed in order to fulfill that same need. These are problems with known solutions that can be checked and "graded" in order to make sure the student understands the material before moving on. These can be found in [Activities](1-activities). Students will typically begin working on activities prescribed as prerequisites for their chosen project. These activities are done on a volunteer basis. This provides a low risk way for students to "get their feet wet" and decide if they indeed want to continue with undergradute research.

Engineering courses usually have an instructor that prepares a syllabus and gives lectures. This is where research and coursework differ. In research, there is no instructor, the student must learn on her/his own. However, new researchers almost always have a mentor and/or advisor, so as part of the LTRAD program, students will work with a graduate student mentor that will help them to develop a research plan (much like a personal syllabus). To assist in completing the prerequisite activities, and eventually the research project, a page of resources as been compiled and can be found in [Resources](0-resources). Much like an engineering course, these resources are like the required textbook for the class. One does not read the entire textbook, and then attend the class, but rather uses the textbook throughout as a reference to complete the assigments and projects. The tutorials and documents in the [Resources](0-resources) section should be treated in the same way, that is used as resources in completing the activities and project.

For a completely inexperienced freshman, a reasonable timeline for the program could look as follows:

- Semester 1: (volunteer basis, ~5 hours per week) Find out about the FLOW Lab's LTRAD program, check out the projects, communicate with graduate student mentors, put together a research plan, and begin working on introductory activitites.

- Semester 2: (volunteer basis, ~10 hours per week) Continue working on introductory/prerequisite activities, learning along the way about coding (python or julia), version control (git), technical writing, figure creation, topic specific material, etc.

- Semester 3: (volunteer basis, ~10 hours per week) Finish up prerequisite activities and begin making a research plan for how to complete the research project.

- Semester 4: (MEEN 497R, 3 credits, 10 hours per week) Complete the research project, including a polished technical report/conference paper. (This would typically be sufficient to qualify for presentation in an undergraduate research conference.)

- Beyond: If there is a need in the lab, a student may consider applying for a paid research assistant postion, working directly on research projects with graduate students. If there are not positions available in the FLOW Lab, students should be sufficiently prepared to work in many other labs in the department.

Depending on time commitment, some students may take longer that this, some may be faster, but inevitabley, the motivated freshman putting forth consistent effort can reasonably expect to be working (co-authoring) with graduate students (or independently if especially committed) on peer reviewed research publications by her/his senior year.  Sophomores, Juniors, and Seniors can also expect significant outcomes and can enter at whatever level is appropriate for their abilities and interests.
